Accessible 
Virtual 
Meetings


January 13, 2021



●Gerard Williams
○Section 504 Compliance Officer, Federal Communications Commission
○Nationally Certified American Sign Language Interpreter (NIC Advanced)





●Brandon Pace
○HQ Section 508 Program Manager, U.S. Department of Homeland Security
○Former President of Deaf & Hard-of-Hearing DHS (employee resource group) 
○Certified Professional in Accessibility Core Competencies







Disclaimer


▪The assessments provided herein should not be construed to be 
an endorsement or approval by the Federal Government of any 
specific platform or program.
▪No representations are made in this presentation as to whether 
or how certain platforms are or are not in compliance with legal 
or regulatory requirements fromFCC, DHS, or other 
Federalagencies or legislation.
▪To view this presentation incontext withpresenter remarks, 
please see:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rR9RfhvM2sU




●Accommodations vs. Accessibility
●Challenges and Opportunities
●Best Practices 
●Equipment and Technology Recommendations 
●Virtual Conferencing Platforms Overview
○Zoom
○Cisco WebEx
○Google Meet
○Adobe Connect
○Microsoft Teams
○Live Streaming (e.g. YouTube, Facebook, Twitter)



●So how do I pick a platform?
●Q&A Session 




Quote to share
For most people, technology makes things easier. 
For people with disabilities, however, 
technology makes thingspossible.

Mary Pat Radabaugh

Director of IBM’s National Support Center for People with Disabilities

1998


“

Graphic of 3 different situations: Equality (with three people, of differing heights, all reaching for the same blackboard, which is several feet up from the floor. A wheelchair user cannot reach the board. A short man can barely reach the bottom of the board. A tall woman can reach the middle of the Board. Scenario 2 - Accommodation - shows the same 3 people, all raised on platforms of different heights so that they can all draw on the blackboard at the same height. Scenario 3 - Accessibility -- the blackboard is lowered so that it is closer to the floor. Everyone can use it from their own starting position.
Accommodationisnotthe same as accessibility.

●Accommodations are for individualsand are reactive.
●Accessibility is for populationsand is proactive. 
●Accessibility should make content available to all,in equally effective 
ways, at the same time. 
●Accessibility is the goal, accommodations are just tools to reach it.




Virtual Meetings: Challenges


●Platform limitations (Technical)
●Environmental limitations (Security, budgetary)
●Licensing limitations
○Some features not uniformly available (e.g. higher-tier licenses). 



●Diverse access methods/user interface (UI)
○Inconsistent user experience



●Limited ability to provide technical support
○Screen share does not share screen share tools



●Turn taking awkwardness 
○Lack of access to conversational cues



●Conflicting accommodations
○Limited screen space and bandwidth



●Lack of experience and/or training



Low contrast, low demand box = contains a red minus sign
Low ControlsHigh


Low control, low demand - red minus sign
High controls, high demand - contains green plus sign 

Virtual Meetings: Opportunities


●Interface customization
●User control of Assistive Technology
●Expanded pool of participants
○Geographic, disability, time



●Productivity 
●Richer remote interactions (as opposed to “conference call”)
●…?



wall showing a row of doorways, indicating choices or opportunities 

Virtual Meetings: Universal Meeting Design


●Establish a single Point of Contact
●Ask for help
●Do a technologytestin advance
●Broadcast the CommunicationRules
○Sample at the beginning of this presentation 



●Embrace good meeting managementtechniques




Meeting Management Techniques


Agenda: Distribute a detailed agenda prior to your meeting*

Attendee List: Make available a list of confirmed attendees

Moderator: Assign one participant to serve as meeting 
moderator

Name Announcements: Remind participants to identify 
themselves before they begin to speak

Manage turn-taking: Establish a clear procedure (or utilize a 
digital tool) to manage turn taking

Document sharing: Distribute any relevant documents well in 
advance of the meeting*

*Any/all document distribution should consider accessibility of those documents 
(e.g. word format, PDF, plaintext, braille, videos to be captioned & audio described)


Graphic of a document indicating "document sharing" 
Graphic of people in a circle, indicating "manage turn-taking" 
Graphic of a man with a megaphone, indicating "name announcements" 
Graphic of a person, illustrating "Moderator" 
Graphic of a clipboard and a list of checked off items, illustrating both "Agenda" and "Attendee list"

Meeting Management Techniques -continued


Communication style:Describe the content of the graphics, 
speak at a moderate rate and stay on topic for ease of 
communication 

Check In: At the beginning of your meeting take a moment to 
ask whether all attendees have what they need for effective 
communication.

Solicit Feedback: Provide a contact for and specifically solicit 
feedback on accessibility of the meeting. 

Screen share sparingly:Screen/content is not accessible to 
screen readers users and can take screen space away from 
video that may be needed. Use with caution and consider 
toggling shared content on and off only when needed.


Graphic of 3 hands overlapping, illustrating "check in" 
Graphic of people seated around a conference table with talking balloons overhead, illustrating "Solicit feedback"
Graphic of a figure at a lectern, speaking to a seated audience, illustrating "Communication Style" 
Graphic of a document, illustrating "Screen share sparingly" 

Equipment and Tech Recommendations


Fine tune your audio

○Use a headset whenever possible
○Split your audio between input and output; input via device’s built-in 
microphone, output to headphones or other isolated audio device
○Only use oneaudio connection method (phone or computer, not both)




Fine tune your video

○Frame your shot
○Consider an external webcam
○Disable autofocus if possible
○Consider turning off your video when it is not needed*




Provide multiple connection options

○Maintain flexibility for your attendees by allowing for as many different 
connections as possible (e.g. IP audio, phone audio, audio only, video 
only)





Graphic of a horn, illustrating "Fine tune your audio"
Graphic of a camera, illustrating "Fine tune your video"
Graphic of a power strip with multiple connections, illustrating "Provide multiple connection options"

Closed Captioning trademark "CC" 
Equipment and TechRecommendations-ASR

●Different ASRperformance oncaptioning
●Example between2different platforms:
○MicrosoftTeams(usingMicrosoftAzureSpeechAI)
○Google Meetup(usingGoogleCloud Speech toText AI
●Edgar Allen Poe’s poem“The Raven”
Once Upon a midnight dreary.
While I pondered weak and weary.
Over many acquaint, incurious volume of
forgotten lore.
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly
there came a tapping.
As of someone gently wrapping wrapping up
my chambered or just some visitor I
muttered tapping at my chain. Would or
only this and nothing more.
Once Upon a Midnight dreary while I pondered
weak and weary over many a quaint and curious
volume of Forgotten lore while I nodded nearly
napping suddenly there came a tapping as of
someone gently rapping rapping at my chamber 
door tis some visitor. I muttered tapping at my
chamber door only this and nothing more.
Google trademark
Microsoft trademark

Platforms: Zoom


Pros


Cons


●Highly accessible via screen reader
●Simple intuitive User Interface (UI)
●Side by side mode/dual monitor support
●High quality video/audio with low stutter 
rate
●Non-video participants can be hidden
●Built-in support for captioning 
(via participant or vendor)
●Supports up to 100 video participants (350 
total)
●Multi-pinning and multi-spotlight support
●Can move captions box around the window



●Integrated meeting 
management tools lack 
sophistication
●Captioning display lacks 
customization, sophistication, 
consistency.
●Security concerns continue to 
be prevalent, especially 
amongst government entities
●Built-in live ASR using Otter.ai 
-but for Business or Pro 
accounts only (not gov)





Zoom trademark

Platforms: Zoom


screen capture of users on a Zoom platform call - there are 3 rows of 4 pictures of different users, and a 5th bottom row of one person

Platforms: Zoom


Split screen capture illustrating Zoom platform. Left hand screen illustrates an icon menu; the right hand picture illustrates 6 participant screens in user view

Platforms: Zoom (Placement of Captions)


Zoom trademark
screen capture of Zoom captions placed on screen.

Platforms: Zoom (Roll-up captioning)


Zoom trademark
screen capture of captions on a Zoom platform, illustrating roll-up captioning

Platforms: Cisco WebEx


Pros


Cons


●Easy to procure; security and 
enterprise ready
●Capability to create a separate 
module for captioning 
(Multimedia viewer)
●Centralized feature management 
(administrators)



●Not usable for screen reader 
users.
●Complex user interface requires 
training to navigate
●Unintuitive video “pinning” 
functionality 
●Inflexible video interface 
●Centralized feature management 
(administrators)
●Additional steps to join a meeting





Cisco Webex Trademark
screen capture of woman in a Cisco Webex platform call

Platforms: Cisco WebEx


Screen capture of attendees on a Cisco Webex call - 4 rows with 4 pictures in each row. 

Platforms: Cisco WebEx


Screen capture of Cisco Webex meeting platform meeting center page, showing different features available to users. 

Platforms: Google Meet


Pros


Cons


●FedRAMP approved for some agencies 
●Easy to use and intuitive 
●Automated captioning has high accuracy 
and names speakers (isolated audio 
channels) 
●Grid layout for video 
●Screen reader and keyboard accessible
●Audio via phone connection
●Browser based-no download required



●Not widely available to 
government agencies 
●Max number of video 
participants depends on 
license (100, 150, 250)





Trademark of Google Meet Platform 

Platforms: Google Meet


Screen capture of users on a Google Meet platform, showing 3 simultaneous users on a call.
Google Meet platforms trademark

Platforms: Adobe Connect


Pros


Cons


●Majority of federal agencies use it 
●Easy to procure; security and 
enterprise ready
●Grid layout for video feed
●Maximum user interface flexibility; 
can add a dedicated pod for 
captioning 
●HTML5 client and desktop 
application available 



●Bandwidth intensive, 
deprioritize video
●Complex user interface
●Not usable for screen reader 
users
●No video pinning functionality
●Requires additional licenses for 
add-ons such as conference lines





Adobe Connect platform trademark

Platforms: Adobe Connect


Screen capture of different screens from Adobe Connect platform, illustrating different functions: Chat, share, web links, notes, file and attendees.

Platforms: Adobe Connect


Screen capture of users on Adobe Connect Platform. 3 rows of attendees with 3 people in each row. 

Platforms: Adobe Connect


Screen capture of Adobe Connect Platform illustrating different features - "share my screen", video, captioning, attendees and chat. 

Platforms: Microsoft Teams


Pros


Cons


●Easy to procure; security 
and enterprise ready
●Available to almost all 
government agencies with 
Office 365
●Built-in across Office 365 
applications for real-time 
collaboration
●Embedded invite for one 
click meetings via Outlook
●Multi-pinning enabled



●“All-in-one” platform with numerous features 
that may confuse users 
●Accessibility issues (e.g. guests unable to pin, 
unreliable captioning, screen reader access)
●Not user-friendly & not intuitive
●Captioning only feasible using their Azure AI; 
no other way to feed captions from CART 
provider 
●License dilemma to obtain alternative methods 
for accommodations





Microsoft Teams trademark

Platforms: Microsoft Teams


screen capture of attendees on a Microsoft Teams call - 3 rows of 3 people per row. 

Platforms: Microsoft Teams (Captioning example)


Microsoft Teams trademark.
Window illustrating captioning GIF on Microsoft Teams platform

Platforms: Live Streaming


Pros


Cons


●Less bandwidth 
●More control of broadcasting 
various content and video feeds to 
audience, especially picture-in-
picture ASL interpreter and burn-
on captioning 
●Ease of access to virtually 
everybody who have a computer 
or mobile device



●Requires many moving parts along with 
technical-intensive knowledge to 
implement solutions, especially with 
accessibility
●Burn-in or embedded captions on 
streams are not accessible to screen 
reader or refreshable braille display users
●Streaming services can be over reliant on 
ASR generated captioning
●Does not allow for a great degree of user 
customization





Twiter trademark
YouTube Trademark
Facebook trademark

Platforms: Live Streaming (Bad example)


Twitter trademark
YouTube Trademark
Facebook trademark
screen capture of live streaming video with captioning (bad example)

Platforms: Live Streaming (Good example)


Twitter trademark
YouTube Trademark
Facebook trademark
Screen capture of live streaming video feed with good captioning shown.

Platforms: Live Streaming (Size & Transition)


Twitter trademark
YouTube trademark
Facebook trademark
Screen capture of live streaming video, showing transitions between multiple windows and speakers on the screen . 

Platforms: Live Streaming (Burn-on Captions)


Twitter trademark 
YouTube trademark
Facebook trademark
Screen capture of live streaming video feed with burnt-on captions.

Platforms: Virtual Event Platform


Pros


Cons


●Less bandwidth 
●More control of broadcasting 
various content and video feeds to 
audience, especially picture-in-
picture ASL interpreter and burn-
on captioning 
●Ease of access to virtually 
everybody who have a computer 
or mobile device
●Some vendors incorporated 
accessibility features in their 
platform and/or design



●Cost-intensive 
●Requires many moving parts along with 
technical-intensive knowledge to 
implement solutions, especially with 
accessibility
●Burn-in or embedded captions on 
streams are not accessible to screen 
reader or refreshable braille display users
●Does not allow for a great degree of user 
customization





Trademark "On24"
Trademark "rivetlogic"
Trademark "BigMarker" 
Trademark "Hey Summit" 
Trademark "hopin"

Platforms: Virtual Event Platform


Trademark "ON24"
Trademark "rivetlogic" 
Trademark "BigMarker" 
Trademark "HeySummit" 
Trademark "hopin"
Screen capture of virtual event platform illustrating pa nel of speakers with a separate window for the ASL interpreter and the Q&A box.

Platforms: Virtual Event Platform


Trademark "ON24"
Trademark "rivetlogic"
Trademark "BigMarker"
Trademark "HeySummit" 
Trademark "hopin"
Screen capture of virtual event platform showing speaker, with voiceover, captioning and ASL interpreter. Also shown is the sponsorship (MS) slate of speakers and name of the session. 

So how do I pick a platform?


None of the virtual meeting platforms are perfect.

Sorry

●Check with your agency/organization to identify which platforms 
you already have access to
●Engage people with disabilities to test and evaluate those 
platforms with you
●Implement meeting management strategies to compensate for 
weaknesses in your platform
●Utilize other services as possible to compensate for weaknesses 
in your platform (e.g. separate captioning streaming website, 
hand raising tool)




Wrap Up


●Ask: “How can I help?”
●Don’t let the perfect be the enemy of the good, but…
○Don’t stop collecting feedback and iterating



●Stay flexible
●Spend time to save time


Contact Us

●Gerard Williams (FCC):gerard.williams@fcc.gov
●Brandon Pace (DHS): Brandon.Pace@hq.dhs.gov
●Archived Presentation:
https://www.accessibilityonline.org/cioc-508/archives/110839




