This animation explains requirements for accessible bathing facilities in the ADA and ABA Standards.  These Standards provide specifications for transfer showers, roll-in showers, and bathtubs.  At least one shower or bathtub must comply in bathing facilities required to be accessible.
Requirements for transfer showers allow users with disabilities, including those who use wheelchairs, to approach the stall, operate controls from outside, and position for transfer to shower seats.  Grab bars opposite the seat and shallow thresholds, one half inch maximum high, facilitate transfer from wheelchairs and other mobility aids.  Shower spray units must be located on the side wall opposite the seat.
Transfer shower stalls must be 3 feet wide and 3 feet deep, measured to the center points of walls.  These are absolute, not minimum, dimensions so that grab bars and shower controls are within reach from the seat.  Clear floor space at the compartment must be at least 36 inches deep and 48 inches long.  The length is measured from the control wall so that the clear floor space extends beyond the seat wall at least 12 inches.  This clearance provides space to operate shower controls and position for transfer.  The additional space beyond the seat wall allows proper alignment with the seat for transfer.
The front edge of shower seats must extend 15 to 16 inches from the seat wall.  Gaps at the rear edge cannot exceed 2 and a half inches.  The seat must extend from the back wall to a point within 3 inches of the compartment entry.  The side edge cannot be more than 1 and a half inches from the back wall.  The Standards also permit seats to be L-shaped.  Under this option, a portion of the seat 14 to 15 inches wide extends 22 to 23 inches from the seat wall.
Roll-in showers are sized to accommodate mobility aids and shower chairs without having to transfer to a seat.  They must be at least 30 inches deep and 60 inches long.  Grab bars are required on all three sides.  Shower spray units and controls can be located on the back wall or either side wall in stalls not equipped with seats.  Clear floor space in front of the shower at least 30 inches by 60 inches provides room to maneuver into and out of the stall and for turning.  Transitions at showers must be smooth to accommodate wheeled mobility aids.  If a threshold is provided, it cannot exceed half an inch and must be properly beveled on both sides.  Solutions such as trench drains that control water without a threshold will provide easier access.
Folding seats can be provided in roll-in showers and are a good idea since they provide the option to transfer from mobility aids.  They are also helpful to people with limited balance or standing ability.  If provided, a seat must be a folding type that is permanently attached to a side wall.  Grab bars are dimensioned so that they do not overlap the seat.  The shower spray unit and controls must be located on the back wall within 27 inches from the seat wall so that they are usable from the seat.  It is advisable, though not required, that a foot of additional clear floor space be provided beyond the seat wall to allow more flexibility in positioning for transfer to the seat, similar to the configuration required at transfer showers.
A lavatory can overlap a portion of the clear floor space, but must be located on the side opposite the seat so that transfer space remains unobstructed.  No other fixture is permitted to overlap the shower clearance.
An alternative to the standard roll-in shower is permitted that allows the entry side to be partially enclosed.  The shower entry must be at least 36 inches wide.  The shower compartment is required to be 36 inches deep absolute.
Grab bars are required on the back wall and on the side wall farthest from the entry.  The shower spray unit and controls also must be located on this side wall unless a seat is provided.
This type of shower, like the standard roll-in shower, can have a folding seat.  Seats must be mounted on the front wall.  This location provides clear space next to the seat for transfer.  The grab bar on the side wall is dimensioned so that it does not overlap the seat.  The shower spray unit and controls must be located on the side wall 27 inches maximum from the seat wall, or they can be mounted on the back wall opposite the seat within 15 inches on either side of the seat centerline.  Placement on the back wall is allowed only when a seat is provided.
The Standards also address access to bathtubs.  Tub controls are located toward the open side so that they are usable from outside the tub.  A removable in-tub seat or a permanent seat at the head end is required.  Removable seats must attach securely when in place so that they do not move or shift during use.  Grab bars on the back and side walls provide support in transferring to and using seats.
If a permanent seat is provided, a grab bar on the head end wall is not provided because it would interfere with use of the seat.  The dual grab bars on the back wall must extend to the edge of the seat so that they are usable from the seat.  These grab bars facilitate entry into the tub from the seat.
The required clear floor space at tubs must be at least 30 inches wide and extend the length of the tub.  If a permanent seat is provided, the clear floor space must extend at least 12 inches beyond the head end wall to allow proper positioning for transfer.
A lavatory can overlap this clearance at the control end only.  The knee and toe space required below lavatories also accommodates pull-up space at controls.  It is advisable to keep lavatories outside the tub clearance for easier access to tub controls.  No other fixture can overlap tub clearances.
Further guidance on accessible bathing facilities and other requirements in the ADA and ABA Standards is available from the U.S. access board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. access board in cooperation with the federal agencies that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.